Barry Lyndon
 
{{Infobox film
| name           = Barry Lyndon
| image          = Barry_Lyndon_A.jpg
| alt            = 
| caption        = Theatrical release poster by Jouineau Bourduge
| director       = Stanley Kubrick
| producer       = Stanley Kubrick
| screenplay     = Stanley Kubrick
| based on       =   Patrick Magee Diana Koerner Gay Hamilton
| narrator       = Michael Hordern
| cinematography = John Alcott
| editing        = Tony Lawson
| studio         = Hawk Films Peregrine Productions
| distributor    = Warner Bros.
| released       =  
| runtime        = 187 minutes  
| country        = United Kingdom United States
| language       = English
| budget         = $11 million
| gross          = United States: $20,000,000  Worldwide: $31,500,000
}} period drama Patrick Magee, Academy Awards, the film won four Oscars in production categories.

The film, which had a modest commercial success and a mixed critical reception on initial release, is now regarded as one of Kubricks finest films. In numerous polls, such as Village Voice (1999), Sight & Sound (2002), and Time (magazine)|Time (2005), it has been rated one of the greatest films ever made.    

==Plot==
===Act I===
:By What Means Redmond Barry Acquired the Style and Title of Barry Lyndon omniscient (though unreliable ) narrator states that in 1750s Ireland, the father of Redmond Barry is killed in a duel over a disputed horse sale. The widow, disdaining offers of marriage, devotes herself to her only son.

As a teenager, Barry becomes strongly attached to his older cousin, Nora Brady. Though she charms him during a card game, she later shows interest in a well-off English Captain John Quin, much to Barrys dismay. Nora and her family plan to relieve their poverty with an advantageous marriage, but Barry refuses to accept the situation and shoots Quin in a duel. Barry flees to Dublin, but en route is robbed of purse and equipment by Captain Feeney, an infamous highwayman. Broke, Barry joins the British army, whereupon he reunites with Captain Grogan, a family friend, who informs him that, in fact, he did not kill Quin — Barrys dueling pistol was loaded with tow. The duel was staged by Noras family to get rid of Barry so that their family finances would be secured through the marriage of Nora and Quin.

Barrys regiment is sent to Germany to fight in the Seven Years War, where Captain Grogan is fatally wounded by the French in a skirmish at the Battle of Minden. Barry deserts the army, stealing an officer couriers uniform, horse, and identification papers. En route to neutral Holland he encounters the Prussian Captain Potzdorf, who, seeing through his disguise, offers him the choice of being turned back over to the British where he will be shot as a deserter, or enlisting in the Prussian army. Barry enlists in his second army and later receives a special commendation from Frederick the Great for saving Potzdorfs life in a battle.

After the war ends in 1763, Barry is employed by Captain Potzdorfs uncle in the Prussian Ministry of Police to become the servant of the Chevalier de Balibari, a professional gambler. The Prussians suspect he is a spy and send Barry as an undercover agent to verify this. Barry reveals himself to the Chevalier right away and they become confederates cheating at cards. After he and the Chevalier cheat the Prince of Tübingen at the cardtable, the Prince accuses the Chevalier (without proof) and refuses to pay his debt unless the Chevalier demands satisfaction. When Barry relays this to his Prussian handlers, they (still suspecting that the Chevalier is a spy) are wary of allowing another meeting between the Chevalier and the Prince. So, the Prussians arrange for the Chevalier to be expelled from the country. Barry conveys this plan to the Chevalier, who flees in the night. The next morning, Barry, under disguise as the Chevalier, is escorted from Prussian territory by Prussian officers.

For the next few years, Barry and the Chevalier travel the spas and parlors of Europe, profiting from their gambling with Barry enforcing reluctant debtors with a duel. Seeing that his life is going nowhere, Barry decides to marry into wealth. At a gambling table in Belgium, he encounters the beautiful and wealthy Countess of Lyndon (Marisa Berenson). He seduces and later marries her after the death of her elderly husband, Sir Charles Lyndon (Frank Middlemass).

===Act II===
:Containing an Account of the Misfortunes and Disasters Which Befell Barry Lyndon
In 1773, Barry takes the Countess last name in marriage and settles in England to enjoy her wealth, still with no money of his own. Lord Bullingdon, Lady Lyndons 10-year-old son by Sir Charles, does not approve of the marriage and quickly comes to hate Barry, aware that Barry is merely a "common opportunist" and does not love his mother. The Countess bears Barry a son, Bryan Patrick, but the marriage is unhappy: Barry is openly unfaithful and enjoys spending his wifes money in self-indulgent spending sprees while keeping his wife in dull seclusion.

Some years later, Barrys mother comes to live with him at the Lyndon estate. She warns her son that his position is precarious: If Lady Lyndon were to die, all her wealth would go to her first-born son Lord Bullingdon, leaving Barry penniless. Barrys mother advises him to obtain a noble title to protect himself. To further this goal, he cultivates the acquaintance of the influential Lord Wendover and begins to expend even larger sums of money to ingratiate himself to high society. All this effort is wasted, however, during a birthday party for Lady Lyndon, where Lord Bullingdon announces his hatred of his stepfather and his intention to leave the family estate for as long as his mother remains married to Barry. Angered, Barry assaults Bullingdon before the guests. This public display of cruelty loses Barry all the powerful friends he has worked so hard to make and he is shunned socially. Bullingdon makes good on his announcement and leaves the estate and England itself for parts unknown.

In contrast to his mistreatment of his stepson, Barry proves a compassionate and doting father to Bryan, with whom he spends all his time after Bullingdons departure. He cannot refuse his son anything, and succumbs to Bryans insistence on receiving a full-grown horse for his ninth birthday. The spoiled Bryan disobeys his parents direct instructions that Bryan ride the horse only in the presence of his father, and is thrown by the horse. Bryan dies a few days later from his injuries.
 satisfaction for Barrys public assault, challenging him to a duel.
 fires into the ground, but the unmoved Bullingdon refuses to let the duel end. In the second round, Bullingdon shoots Barry in his left leg. At a nearby inn, a surgeon informs Barry that the leg will need to be amputated below the knee if he is to survive.
 annuity of 500 guineas per year for life on the conditions that he leave England forever and end his marriage to Lady Lyndon. Otherwise, with his credit and bank accounts exhausted, Barrys creditors and bill collectors will assuredly see that he is jailed. Defeated, Barry accepts. The narrator states that Barry goes first to Ireland with his mother, then to the European continent to resume his former profession of gambler (though without his former success) and that he never sees Lady Lyndon again. The final scene (set in December 1789) shows the middle-aged Lady Lyndon signing Barrys annuity cheque as Bullingdon looks on.

===Epilogue===
:It was in the reign of George III that the aforesaid personages lived and quarreled; good or bad, handsome or ugly, rich or poor, they are all equal now.

==Cast==
 
 
* Michael Hordern (voice) as Narrator
* Ryan ONeal as Redmond Barry (later Redmond Barry Lyndon)
* Marisa Berenson as Lady Lyndon Patrick Magee as the Chevalier du Balibari
* Hardy Krüger as Captain Potzdorf
* Gay Hamilton as Nora Brady
* Godfrey Quigley as Captain Grogan
* Steven Berkoff as Lord Ludd
* Marie Kean as Belle, Barrys mother
* Murray Melvin as Reverend Samuel Runt
* Frank Middlemass as Sir Charles Reginald Lyndon
* Leon Vitali as Lord Bullingdon
** Dominic Savage as young Bullingdon
* Leonard Rossiter as Captain John Quin
* André Morell as Lord Wendover
* Anthony Sharp as Lord Hallam
* Philip Stone  as Graham David Morley as Bryan Patrick Lyndon Diana Koerner as Lischen (German Girl)
* Arthur OSullivan as Captain Feeney
* Billy Boyle as Seamus Feeney
  supporting cast is a "glittering procession of Cameo appearance|cameos, not from star names but from vital character players." 
 Vivian also appears (in an uncredited role) as a guest at Bryans birthday party.
 A Clockwork The Shining) are featured as the Chevalier du Balibari and as Graham, respectively.

==Production==
===Development=== Napoleon Bonaparte. A Clockwork Vanity Fair but dropped the project when a serialised version for television was produced. He told an interviewer, "At one time, Vanity Fair interested me as a possible film but, in the end, I decided the story could not be successfully compressed into the relatively short time-span of a feature film...as soon as I read Barry Lyndon I became very excited about it." 
 Telegraph Review (31 January 2009), pp. 16-17  His studio—Warner Bros.—was therefore "eager to bankroll" his next project, which Kubrick kept "shrouded in secrecy" from the press partly due to the furor surrounding the controversially violent A Clockwork Orange (particularly in the UK) and partly due to his "long-standing paranoia about the tabloid press." 
 satirical picaresque about the fortune-hunting of an Irish rogue," Barry Lyndon, the setting of which allowed Kubrick to take advantage of the copious period research he had done for the now-aborted Napoleon.  At the time, Kubrick merely announced only that his next film would star Ryan ONeal (deemed "a seemingly un-Kubricky choice of leading man" ) and Marisa Berenson, a former Vogue (magazine)|Vogue and Time (magazine)|Time magazine cover model, and be shot largely in Ireland.  So heightened was the secrecy surrounding the film that "Even Berenson, when Kubrick first approached her, was told only that it was to be an 18th-century costume piece   she was instructed to keep out of the sun in the months before production, to achieve the period-specific pallor he required." 

===Principal photography===
Principal photography took 300 days,  from spring 1973 through early 1974, with a break for Christmas.
 landscapes of art direction" Roy Walker. Oscars for their "amazing work" on the film. 
 Neues Palais Waterford Castle Tipperary also featured. Several scenes were filmed at Castletown House outside Carrick-on-Suir, Co. Tipperary, and at Youghal, Co. Cork.

===Cinematography=== still photography, "let alone with moving images." 

  were used for Barry Lyndon to allow filming using only natural light.]]
Kubrick was "determined not to reproduce the set-bound,   (the film actually features the lowest f-stop in film history) and fixed focal length" were problematic to mount, and were extensively modified into three versions by Cinema Products Corp. for Kubrick so to gain a wider angle of view, with input from optics expert Richard Vetter of Todd-AO.   This allowed Kubrick and Alcott to shoot scenes lit with actual candles to an average lighting volume of only three candela, "recreating the huddle and glow of a pre-electrical age."  In addition, Kubrick had the entire film Push processing|push-developed by one stop. 

Although Kubricks express desire was to avoid electric lighting where possible, most shots were achieved with conventional lenses and lighting, but were lit to deliberately mimic natural light rather than for compositional reasons. In addition to potentially seeming more realistic, these methods also gave a particular period look to the film which has often been likened to 18th-century paintings (which were, of course, depicting a world devoid of electric lighting), in particular owing "a lot to William Hogarth, with whom Thackeray had always been fascinated." 

 
According to critic Tim Robey, the film has a "stately, painterly, often determinedly static quality."  For example, to help light some interior scenes, lights were placed outside and aimed through the windows, which were covered in a diffuse material to scatter the light evenly through the room rather than being placed inside for maximum use as most conventional films do. A sign of this method occurs in the scene where Barry duels Lord Bullingdon. Though it appears to be lit entirely with natural light, one can see that the light coming in through the cross-shaped windows in the abandoned chapel appears blue in color, while the main lighting of the scene coming in from the side is not. This is because the light through the cross-shaped windows is daylight from the sun, which when recorded on the film stock used by Kubrick showed up as blue-tinted compared to the incandescent electric light coming in from the side.

Despite such slight tinting effects, this method of lighting not only gave the look of natural daylight coming in through the windows, but it also protected the historic locations from the damage caused by mounting the lights on walls or ceilings and the heat from the lights. This helped the film "fit... perfectly with Kubricks   aesthetic - the film is consciously a museum piece, its characters pinned to the frame like butterflies." 

===Music=== Suite in romantically with orchestral strings, harpsichord, and timpani. It is used at various points in the film, in various arrangements, to indicate the implacable working of impersonal fate. 
 Irish folk music, including Seán Ó Riadas song Women of Ireland, arranged by Paddy Moloney and performed by The Chieftains.

==Reception== The Shining – a project that would not only please him artistically, but also be more likely to succeed financially. Still, several other critics, including Gene Siskel, praised the films technical quality and strong narrative, and Siskel himself counted it as one of the five best films of the year.

In recent years, the film has gained a more positive reaction.   it holds a 96% "Certified Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 49 reviews, eight of which are from the sites "top critics."  Roger Ebert added the film to his Great Movies list on September 9, 2009, writing, "It defies us to care, it asks us to remain only observers of its stately elegance", and it "must be one of the most beautiful films ever made." 
 The Age of Innocence, and Wes Andersons Rushmore (film)|Rushmore. 

===Awards=== Best Art Roy Walker, Best Cinematography Best Costume Best Musical Best Director, Best Picture, Best Adapted Screenplay.   
 Award for Best Cinematography. Best Film, Costume Design.

==Source novel==
Kubrick based his adapted screenplay on William Makepeace Thackerays The Luck of Barry Lyndon (republished as the novel Memoirs of Barry Lyndon, Esq.), a picaresque tale written and published in serial form in 1844. 

The film departs from the novel in several ways. In Thackerays writings, events are related in the first person by Barry himself. A comic tone pervades the work, as Barry proves both a raconteur and an unreliable narrator. Kubricks film, by contrast, presents the story objectively. Though the film contains voice-over (by actor Michael Hordern), the comments expressed are not Barrys, but those of an omniscient, although not entirely impartial, narrator. This change in perspective alters the tone of the story; Thackeray tells a jaunty, humorous tale, but Kubricks telling is essentially tragedy|tragic, albeit with a satirical tone.   Kubrick felt that using a first-person narrative would not be useful in a film adaptation:

 "I believe Thackeray used Redmond Barry to tell his own story in a deliberately distorted way because it made it more interesting. Instead of the omniscient author, Thackeray used the imperfect observer, or perhaps it would be more accurate to say the dishonest observer, thus allowing the reader to judge for himself, with little difficulty, the probable truth in Redmond Barrys view of his life. This technique worked extremely well in the novel but, of course, in a film you have objective reality in front of you all of the time, so the effect of Thackerays first-person story-teller could not be repeated on the screen. It might have worked as comedy by the juxtaposition of Barrys version of the truth with the reality on the screen, but I dont think that Barry Lyndon should have been done as a comedy."  

Kubrick also changed the plot. For example, the novel does not include a final duel. By adding this episode, Kubrick establishes dueling as the films central motif:  the film begins with a duel where Barrys father is shot dead, and duels recur throughout the film.

==Notes==
 

==References==
 

==External links==
 
*  
*  
*  
*  
*   at dailyscript.com
*   at indelibleinc.com
*  , a "non-profit resource archive for documentary materials", including essays and articles
*   at SomeCameRunning.typepad.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 